I don't know about you,
but movies about everyday heroes make me cry.
If a movie were made about the life of Judy Wicks,
I would certainly be crying.
This woman is a testament to what one person can do
fueled by a social conscience and passion.
As a conscientious cafe owner,
Judy began seeing the interrelationship
between everything she served in her restaurant
and went to the ends of the earth to see
the political ramifications
of supporting certain commodity industries.
She ultimately met with the Zapatistas in Mexico
in an activist program she humorously called
"Eating with the Enemy."
(slow horn music)
Judy, if you can give us
a little bit of background
about your origins as an activist.
You did some really classic things in your youth.
Why don't you just launch in?
Well, during the '60s, coming of age in the '60s,
I was very concerned about the Civil Rights Movement
and about protesting the Vietnam War.
But the first time I actually committed civil disobedience
wasn't about the usual activist issues.
I had moved onto a block in Philadelphia,
a block of Victorian brownstone houses
that I just loved and on the first floor
were little businesses, there's a health food store
on the first floor of my house, and then up the street,
there was a locally owned restaurant
where I had just gotten a job as a waitress.
I was I would guess about 23 at the time.
And just after I had moved in,
I found out that the block was gonna be demolished.
So I was really aghast that these beautiful brownstones
were being torn down and the small businesses
evacuated in order to make way for a mall,
fast food restaurants and chain stores.
I joined the community group to work
to stop the demolition, and while we were
preparing our court case,
one morning I heard this rumbling in the back alley
and I looked out my back window,
and I saw this bulldozer coming up the alley
and then it rammed into the house behind me
that had just been evacuated,
the residents and businesses were evicted,
and it was beginning to demolish the house.
So I thought, "Oh my gosh!
"They're at my door, McDonald's and Dunkin Donut
"are at the door."
I ran outside, I ran around to the back.
I yelled to one of the other
community group members to call our lawyer
to get a restraining order.
And then I ran around and lay down
in front of the bulldozer
to keep them from damaging the property
until we could get a restraining order.
Luckily, he stopped,
Thank goodness.
and our community group prevailed,
and I was able to buy the house
where I was living.
And ten years later, started the White Dog Cafe
on the first floor of my house.
That's fabulous, I love your roots,
and that must have really emboldened you.
Were you able to see in that moment,
even though you were just reacting to the moment
on one level as a young woman activist,
did it embolden you to start taking other steps in life
to realize that that bulldozer did stop
and you were able to be effective in your cause?
Yes, and I think it really was the first moment
where I realized how passionately I felt
about protecting communities and small businesses
from the onslaught of multinational corporations.
And that was kind of the beginning
of my passion around this area.
And so you opened--
it's White Dog restaurant or cafe?
White Dog Cafe.
You opened the White Dog Cafe
and then, let's progress the story from there
of some of what you began encountering,
and I like this story, about your sister restaurant
in Chiapas and also the coffee industry
and what you were experiencing.
'Cause this is a big one, even today this is big.
I started the restaurant very small.
It was a coffee and muffin take-out shop
without even any tables.
I grew it over time into a 200-seat restaurant
with 100 employees, so it's really not a cafe anymore
but rather a restaurant,
but White Dog Cafe is the original name.
Having been a peace activist in my youth
and feeling that my government
fooled me about Vietnam,
many of my generation were killed
in the war, of course,
I was very dubious
of U.S. government foreign policy.
When there was a civil war going on in Nicaragua,
and the Reagan administration was saying,
"Well, the Sandinistas are communists,
"and the Contras are the freedom fighters,
"you know that this is about
"protecting democracy from communism."
And at the time I was a pro-capitalist person,
I was raised to fear the communists,
but I didn't know whether it was true or not.
I said this time I was gonna find out for myself.
I was thinking about, well,
what makes sense for a restaurant
to get involved with foreign policy?
I was trying to figure out how to make sense of this
to my customers and so on,
and I heard about sister cities.
And I thought, well why not a sister restaurant program?
I'll establish a sister relationship with
a restaurant in Nicaragua and ask them
are they privately owned, the Sandinista communists;
what's happening?
At first, it was gonna be a pen-pal relationship.
And then a friend of mine was taking
groups of people to Nicaragua, and he said,
"Why don't you come down,
"and find a sister restaurant yourself?"
I said, "No way!"
"I go upstairs to my house, downstairs to my business,
"I've got a two-year-old and a four-year-old.
"Especially I don't go to countries having civil wars.
I'm not going!"
Of course, a month later, I was in Nicaragua (laughs).
Right, of course.
Couldn't help yourself.
And it really changed my life,
to see how different the reality on the ground was
from what I was reading in the news back home.
The need to let Americans know what our foreign policy
was doing to the lives of people in other countries.
So I started bringing in delegations.
I went to Nicaragua three times
during the civil war there and so on.
Then I went to Vietnam, a customer of mine was saying,
"You should go to Vietnam because there's such
"an inequity in U.S. foreign policy there."
Because we're still continuing the Vietnam War
through an economic embargo against Vietnamese people.
I decide to go to Vietnam, and I would never
have thought of that before,
I think of Vietnam as being a war.
But in going, I now think of them as being a people
and finding out--I could go on forever
just about that experience or any of my trips,
but anyway, I began to see in my travels,
I went to the Soviet Union, I went Cuba,
and I like to say we ate with the Sandinistas
and the Zapatistas and the Cubans and the Soviets
and the Palestinians, so our nickname
for the program became "Eating with the Enemy."
I love that!
Our purpose in the beginning was to
demonstrate that it's through dialogue and understanding
that we achieve world peace, rather than
through economic and military domination.
But in my travels, I began to see
so much of what was happening around war
was in fact about militaries protecting corporate interests.
Because publicly traded companies have to grow grow grow,
that's their mandate, they have a constant need
for new, cheap resources, natural resources,
new access to cheap labor, and new markets
to expand their business.
They need a military to protect that.
I saw a quote one time from New York columnist
Thomas Friedman, that we can't have McDonald's
without McDonald Douglas,
the defense contractor.
Very true.
I started seeing the relationship between war
and corporate interests, and began to see
that it wasn't really a global struggle
between communism and capitalism,
but between a community and corporatism.
Very, very good and clear distinction.
Everybody should underline that.
Right, right, exactly.
When the Zapatistas had their uprising
on the the day that NAFTA went into effect,
January 1, 1994,
I was very interested in
why this uprising, why on the day
that NAFTA went into effect?
I went down there bringing a delegation
of my customers to learn
about the roots of the unrest
and found that, in order to comply with NAFTA,
the Mexican government had to change their constitution,
and in particular, a part of that constitution
that guaranteed the indigenous people
access to their communal lands, for farming,
that was communally owned land for the indigenous people.
This was won by Zapata,
one of the leaders in the revolutionary war.
But to comply with NAFTA, they had to do away
with that part of the constitution
and open these indigenous lands to privatization
and exploitation by foreign corporations.
The Zapatistas predicted, accurately,
that once the borders to Mexico were opened through NAFTA,
that cheap corn subsidized by the U.S. government,
grown by corporations in the U.S.,
would be dumped into Mexico,
putting out of business the indigenous farmers.
And that's exactly what happened.
It caused a mass migration to the United States
as well as forcing Mexican farmers
to take jobs on corporate plantations
or in the maquiladoras, the factories and so on.
The Zapatistas were saying,
"We want the right to farm our land.
"We want the right to community self-reliance
"where we can grow our own food,
"and live in peace and have autonomy."
And also to keep their culture,
they wanted the right to maintain their culture,
to teach their children in their own languages.
They didn't want to be gobbled up by
the corporate, global mono-culture of the West.
That was what the uprising was about.
I began to see the relationship between
what was happening to the Zapatistas
and the indigenous people in Mexico,
to those farmers with what was happening
to our farmers at home, that our farmers at home
were being forced off the land
by the same forces, the corporate forces, that were
aided by the U.S. government
who provides these subsidies to our farm bill
that create an unfair advantage to the large corporations.
They get these millions and billions of dollars
in subsidies, and the family farms don't.
So we're losing our family farms,
and the corporations are buying up the land
and planting mono-crops for export.
That's what really made me understand
that we needed to create a new economy.
What really triggered me to change my mission
of my sister restaurant program
was the Acteal massacre.
I had just gotten a urgent email
from our sister restaurant in Chiapas
saying that the paramilitaries,
which are the armed forces of the landowners,
were forcing the coffee-growers,
the indigenous people, from their lands.
They were became refugees,
hiding out in the mountains and so on,
and that she was really nervous
that something bad was gonna happen.
And days after that, there was the Acteal massacre
where 45 unarmed, mostly women and children,
in the coffee-growing of Chiapas,
these people were massacred by the paramilitaries.
I was really just struck by this, and thinking,
"I want to do something."
Now, these paramilitary,
are they contracted directly by the corporations?
Or is it inclusion with the governments?
Both, from what I understand
that the paramilitaries
began as forces to protect the land,
the landowners, the wealthy landowners,
they're their own little militias.
But most of the people in Chiapas,
the progressive folks, feel that the Mexican army
is actually providing guns to these paramilitaries,
that the paramilitaries do the dirty work
that Mexican government doesn't want to do.
It's sort of like how the United States
provides arms for, say, the Salvadoran military
back during that civil war rather than invading.
That's one lesson that they learned, for a while anyway,
about Vietnam is not to actually invade
and have our own troops go in--
Just provide resources.
provide the resource and the guns
so that another army would do the work
that, in the long run, protects not only U.S. corporations,
but the large corporations of those lands,
the wealthy people of the Latin American countries.
After the Acteal massacre, I really wanted
to do something more, and I realized
that I had kind of run my course
in terms of having my sister restaurant program
be about dialogue and communication
and educating the folks back home,
that I wanted to become an active participant,
and to actually do something.
I was feeling kind of helpless, and what can I do?
All of a sudden, I realize because people were saying
that no one was listening about the violence
that the peace activists were having demonstrations,
but no one was listening.
And I thought, "You know what people listen to,
"that's the voice of business.
"And I'm a businessperson.
"I may be a small businessperson,
"but I'm a businessperson,
"and there's power in that."
That's when I first started to think,
"Well, I'm gonna use the power of business
"to work for justice."
Even though I had, for so long,
seen business as being the enemy,
that business is unjust and that the interests of business
underlie war and violence,
but the way to counter that
is to use business also.
Business that's based in community
and is there to serve community
as opposed to the corporate interests
in a corporatism situation.
I formed a business group called BETHRIC,
Businesses for Ethical Trade and Human Rights in Chiapas.
And I called up everybody I know,
I belong to a social venture network,
which is a membership organization
of progressive business owners and investors.
From that, I knew a lot of different progressive people,
and they would know somebody else and so on.
I tried to round up businesses that sourced
from Mexico, like coffee and textiles,
and got a group of about 15 businesses,
American businesses, that included
Ben & Jerry's and the Frontier Cooperative
and a lot of different progressive coffee companies,
Thanksgiving Coffee Company, here in Sonoma.
That gave me an impressive letterhead,
you know, for my stationery
and for our press releases and so on.
I took just a small group down to Chiapas
to investigate how the violence
was affecting the indigenous businesses,
and of course, therefore, the indigenous people,
but put it in the context of business.
We went down there, we hired a guide, a translator,
someone that was knowledgeable,
actually an American who had been
working down there for a while, Monica Ferrell.
We went around and saw
what was happening, how the paramilitaries
were forcing people off their land,
destroying the farm crops, destroying the coffee harvest,
and basically attacking the self-reliance
of the indigenous people
and trying to keep the indigenous coffee-growers
in a position where they had to sell
the coffee to the Coyotes at a very low price
because there was no one else to sell it to and they--
Explain Coyotes.
The Coyotes are kind of the free agents
that go around and buy coffee from the peasant farmers,
and then they sell that coffee to the large corporations,
like the big coffee companies and so on.
This is a way of getting cheap coffee
funneled into the corporate system
for export to big American and foreign coffee companies.
With that experience, well,
first of all, our little delegation went to Mexico City
on our way home to have a press conference.
Some friends of mine from Global Exchange
helped arrange the press conference,
and I had no idea how successful it was gonna be,
when we walked into the press room,
the whole room was full.
I mean there must have been 50 press people there
with instantaneous translation set up,
so that they could translate from our English report
into Spanish for the Spanish press that was awaiting our--
But when they saw our letterhead with
Ben & Jerry's and all these American firms on it,
they all showed up.
We had an amazing press conference,
and the next day, the English-speaking newspaper
had as their headline,
"U.S. firms call for peace in Chiapas."
That the voice of business was heard.
Good job.
That was really what empowered me
even more than lying down in front of
that bulldozer years before,
to realize that it worked, that our voice got through.
Friends of mine later said that
that is the kind of thing that really saved lives
because once the Mexican government,
the paramilitaries and so on knew that we were watching
that they didn't dare continue to have massacres and so on.
There hasn't been a massacre since then.
It sort of went underground, the whole violence.
Somebody might disappear here and there,
but there wasn't any very blatant violence
as there had been in the past.
I'm not saying that we stopped that single-handedly,
but I feel like we've contributed to that situation.
I guess I had a turning point
when a Mexican reporter said to me,
"Is your business group a business group?
"Are you businesses, or are you
a human rights organization?"
So I proudly said, "We're both."
And he looked very puzzled, but in making that statement,
it became clear to me what I wanted to do next,
and that was to help the Zapatistas start a business
and to really work on creating a just global economy,
where people got fairly treated,
got a fair wage for their labor and so on.
That began kind of a new chapter for me.
When I got home,
I went back to Frontier Coffee.
I never had met the owner of the company,
the CEO, before, but I knew his name.
I called him up, and I said,
"Will you go back to Chiapas with me
"and help the Zapatistas start a coffee cooperative?"
And he did! And I couldn't believe it.
He went with me.
I took some investor friends from home,
two older gentleman that were
interested in progressive causes.
And we went back to Chiapas, we ended up
going back several different times,
and our translator-guide, Monica Ferrell,
was able to reach the Zapatista leadership
to let them know what we had in mind.
They told us about two coffee cooperatives
that they felt were ready to begin moving towards
having enough strength to do exporting.
Our little delegation went and met with them.
We chose one because the quality of the coffee was better,
it was a little higher in the mountains
where the coffee is better, and the cloud reserves,
and started working with them.
The cooperative was called Moot Veets,
which means "mountain of the birds"
in a little town, very remote.
We started putting together a business plan, basically.
Rick, his company from Frontier,
and Equal Exchange was part of our delegation,
they sent technical people to help
with organic certification.
We raised the money for
their organic certification labeling.
We raised money, and I put in $20,000
from the White Dog Cafe for the pre-financing
of the harvest, and that's the main
obstacle for these cooperations.
The peasants, when they finish picking their coffee,
they have to find a buyer right away
'cause they need the money.
There was never this up-front money
for the cooperative to buy the coffee from the peasants,
so the peasant members of these cooperatives
would sell the coffee to the Coyotes
just 'cause they needed the cash.
You took the panic and the fear
out of that by pre-financing?
Right.
So they could hold out for,
or a proper amount of money could be negotiated
for the crop then, right?
Right, exactly. Exactly.
My friend, Hal Taussig, put in $20,000,
and I put in $20,000, and $40,000 is what was needed
to buy enough coffee to fill a container.
With the exports, you have to fill
a whole container to make it work.
Or maybe in the beginning it was a
half a container that we were trying to get together,
I can't remember now, it's been a while.
But anyway, we got enough money to make it feasible,
economically feasible to ship out of the country.
It was with great anticipation
that the first shipment made it
because they were afraid that the Coyotes,
the paramilitaries, would attack their truck
getting to the port to ship it to the States.
But we got word that it had made it
into the States, and then it went to fair-trade importers,
one in Texas called the Human Bean Company.
Oh, yes, I've heard of the Human Bean,
I've seen that.
You've heard of Cari Apple?
And the other two cooperative coffees
near Atlanta, outside of Atlanta, Bill Harris.
Hal's $20,000 went to Bill Harris,
to send his pre-financing to the Zapatista cooperative,
and then mine went to Cari Apple.
I'd never met Cari Apple, so I loaned her $20,000.
Then they sent that money down,
and then it was returned with the coffee.
Once the two importers, Bill and Cari, sold their coffee
then they returned the money to Hal and me.
And then we repeated that process the second year,
until, by the third year the cooperative
had gotten so strong that they could pre-finance
their own harvest and didn't need
that pre-financing from the States.
What a success story.
And they ended up eventually shipping 15 containers
to Europe and the United States.
Of course, we use that coffee at the White Dog Cafe,
progressive coffee shops all over
Europe and the United States was using this coffee.
What was happening on the other side
of it as they became more sustainable,
to the communities of the cooperative?
I mean, what did you see
by way of changes in their,
whether you want to call it their communities,
their levels of security, what did you see?
My exposure wasn't that great
because I only would be there during the time
that we were kind of arranging the business deal.
But what I did see was
their organization becoming more professional.
I'll tell you the first time that the Zapatista leaders
entered the room with their ski masks and bandannas
because they wanted to come to the final business deal
when we were making the final arrangements
that the cooperative needed to get the permission
from the leadership of the Zapatistas.
We were all sitting there around a table
and in walk five men, and women,
women leaders, with the bandannas on and so on,
and I kind of gasped, "My god!
"This is real, these are really the Zapatistas!"
But anyway, they developed their business
is what happened.
I'm sure they used those profits then
not only to reinvest in their company,
to grow it larger,
and I know they were trying to raise enough money
to buy a processing plant
because if they process the beans
then they make more money at home.
I don't know if they ever got to that.
I did go back a couple times since then
bringing my employees from the White Dog.
I said, "I want you to know where our coffee comes from
"and to have a direct relationship
"with the growers of our coffee."
So we did that a couple times,
and we also developed relationships
with the women crafts cooperatives,
and we have a store, I have the White Dog Cafe
and the Black Cat, which is our retail store
that features locally made and fair-trade crafts.
I brought down the manager/buyer of the Black Cat,
and he bought crafts from the women's cooperatives,
including bags for the coffee.
We sold bags of the Moot Veets coffee
in our gift shop as well as using it in the White Dog.
The bags were in these little cloth sacks
that the women made that were bordered "Moot Veets"
the name of their cooperative with the hill of birds,
with the mountain with the birds flying,
that we sold in our gift shop.
We did develop that business as well.
The fair-trade label really
does mean something?
The fair-trade label means that the people
that grew the coffee or made the crafts
made a living wage, whatever that may be
I ask only for one reason
because now you look at
the word "organically grown"
and it has some different implications,
as you get corporate interests who come in and influence
legislation that lowers standards and so forth.
Has that happened with fair-trade,
or is fair-trade still fair-trade?
I'm certainly no expert in it,
but I think, for me, I always look for both
the organic label and the fair-trade label.
Because you're right, a lot of organic is not fair-trade.
So I think it's important to look for both.
Now let's take your journey forward, then.
Okay, you did the coffee thing,
you did a fabulous thing in the world.
The press recognized it, you feel empowered,
but then you start stumbling on new information
regarding some of the other offerings of the restaurant
and now you're into the animal issue.
Right, okay.
So another big turning point for me
in terms of my consciousness,
I guess, and my work,
came about when I found out about
the atrocious way that pigs are treated
in the industrial farm system.
White Dog Cafe had been buying
from local farmers for many years
in terms of fruits and vegetables,
and I knew about the importance of buying
uncaged eggs and pastured chicken and whatnot,
but I didn't know about the state
of pigs on industrial farms.
I read John Robbins' book, Diet for a New America,
back in the '90s and learned about
how these pigs, mother pigs, are kept in these cages
where they can't move forward or backward,
they stand on cement their entire lives,
there's a drain for the manure that goes
into a lagoon that then goes on
to pollute the water system and the air
in the rural areas.
They never feel a ray of sunshine,
they never have a breath of fresh air.
They're social creatures who love to sleep
in big piles of pigs, yet they are never allowed
to touch another pig.
They're just confined in this metal cage,
and they're artificially inseminated,
their babies are taken are prematurely.
They don't have the opportunity to build nests.
Right before they give birth, they become very anxious
because their instincts call for them
to build their nest for the babies,
but they have to deliver on these cement floors,
and the babies are taken away prematurely.
The process is repeated over and over again
as though the pigs are just a piece of machinery.
I guess my connection to animals
comes from my love of my dogs.
And we see on the faces of our dogs
all the emotions of love, of fear,
of humor, of guilt,
you know, if they take a little piece of food
off the table or whatever (laughs).
I mean, they have emotions, and I looked into this,
and all mammals, whether we're dogs or pigs
or human beings, have the same part of our brain
that contains the emotions,
and all mammals are capable of these emotions,
the elephants, the cats, the dogs, and the pigs.
I was just outraged at the thought
of my dog being treated like this,
much less like a human being or whatever.
But any mammal, how could we do this?
And I thought that this is a breach of our trust
as the stewards of farm animals.
It's a violation of nature,
to treat these mothers this way,
and the whole concept of birth and creation and so on.
And it's really destroying our own humanity
to institutionalize this type of cruelty and brutality
and base our food system on it.
When I found out about this, I was so appalled,
and I thought, "Oh my gosh, the pork we're serving
"at the White Dog must come from this system?"
Because unless you know otherwise,
that's where it comes from in this country.
Finally, I just went into the kitchen and said,
"Take the all the pork off the menu.
"The bacon, the ham, the porkchops."
That we can't be a part of this evil system.
That we have to find an alternative.
I later thought about this that this is
the Ghandian, Martin Luther King, concept
of non-cooperation with an evil system,
that the first step in social change
is not to cooperate with an evil system.
Whether it's a segregated bus,
and you have a bus boycott,
or assault march, or whatever,
that you stop cooperating as the first step,
and then after you stop cooperating with the evil system,
you're in a position where
you have to build an alternative system.
And so that's what I did.
I thought, "Okay, where can I get the pastured pork?"
I asked the farmer who was bringing in
the free-range eggs and chicken
if he knew a place to get pigs that were raised
traditionally on the pasture, and he did,
and we started ordering two pigs a week.
And we had to order the whole pig
and learn how to cook all the different parts of the pig
and made pork sandwiches for the bar,
and sausages, and so on.
Then I found out about the plight of the cow,
how cows are herbivores, they're supposed
to eat grass and clover, but have been taken off the fields
and fed grain because of the
U.S. Brondell subsidies to the grain farmers.
It makes the cow sick,
it produces a strain of E. coli
that's only found in grain-fed cows that is deadly.
It produces all this methane gas.
It creates an anemia of sorts, too.
If you look at the difference
between grass-fed beef and commercial beef,
it's a completely different color, even.
There's a lot of fat in the grain-fed,
and the advertising programs us,
so we're programmed to look for that
fatty marbling, that that's supposed to be a good thing.
But there is still
this kind of anemic quality to it.
It doesn't have the rich red color of the meat,
of the grass-fed, but the grass-fed
doesn't have the fat, and so a lot of Americans
are used to having all this fat,
so they think it's juicier and better for you,
and they're trained to think that this is the best steak.
Where actually, it's not,
that the grass-fed is healthier for you,
it has vitamins and minerals that are lacking
in the grain-fed,
and it has the fat that's bad for you.
So it's not as healthy for the human beings,
for the milk either is missing
important Omega-3--
I'm not a nutritionist, but I do know that's not as healthy.
I found a source for grass-fed beef
and switched our menu to all grass-fed beef,
grass-fed hamburgers, steaks,
and grass-fed dairy.
Finally, I looked at my menu and thought,
"I've done it; we have a cruelty-free menu.
"All of our meat and poultry come from
small farms where the animals are treated
with respect and compassion.
This is all about us, this is our market niche,
the White Dog is the only restaurant
in town that does this."
You were top White Dog!
Yeah, we're the top dog!
And then I thought to myself,
"Well, Judy, if you really do care about the pigs
"and the cows, and you really do care about
"the environment that's being polluted
"by the concentration of manure.
"And if you care about the family farms
"that are being driven off their farms.
"If you care about the local economy,
"if you care about the workers that are
"in these slaughterhouses,
"horrible slaughterhouses and factory farms.
"And you care about the consumers, ultimately,
"that eat this meat that, unbeknownst to them
"is full of hormones and antibiotics,
"then rather than keeping this as your market niche,
"you'll share this information with your competitors,
"and get everyone to do this."
That was a real threshold that I stepped over
because I realized that it wasn't enough anymore
just to have good practices within my own company,
that I had to work cooperatively with others
to build a whole local system based on these values,
that there was no such thing as one sustainable business,
that we can only be part of a sustainable system,
and that we have to work cooperatively
to create that system.
The farmers needed more than me buying from them
I'd hope!
Of course, so first of all,
I asked the farmer who was bringing in my two pigs a week,
"Would you like to expand your business?"
And he said, "Yes."
I said, "Well, what's holding you back?"
And he said he needed $30,000
to buy a refrigerated truck, so he could
fill it with meat to bring it into all the farmers.
So, I loaned him the $30,000,
and he bought the truck.
That was almost ten years ago now,
and he's paid it back.
Then I formed a non-profit, the White Dog Cafe Foundation,
and started putting 20% of my profits
into the non-profit,
hired our first staff person, Ann Karlen,
and started a project called Fair Food Project.
And it was Ann's role to go around
to the other restaurants and chefs and owners
and tell them about the benefits
of buying from local farmers.
And so, that's how we began.
Fair Food was started eight years ago,
and now it's its own independent non-profit
spun off from White Dog, and has twelve employees,
has many different programs that we've connected
hundreds of farmers with businesses
in the urban marketplace, restaurants and stores.
That's when I moved, really, from being
a competitive businessperson to being a cooperative one,
in order to build our local living economy.
And local living economies
are the key words here.
You also made a choice along the way,
even though you had this
stunningly successful business,
and others encouraged you to replicate, open other ones,
you decided not to, and you decided not to as,
I heard you say, "Because of the quality of relationships."
Can you expand on that?
Success in the business world is measured by growth,
and so of course, people would always come up to me
and they'd hear I'm a well-known restaurateur.
"Well, how many White Dogs are there?
"How many units do you have?"
And I said, "I just have one, you know."
And at first I thought, "Am I big sissy,
"because I'm not doing a chain of White Dogs, or whatever?"
But then I realized that what was
the most important thing to me, in my business
were the relationships I had with my employees,
with my customers, with the farmers,
and that if I grew bigger and bigger
that I wouldn't have these authentic relationships.
And that business is really about relationships.
Money is simply a tool,
that it's about our relationships with everyone
that we buy from and sell to and work with,
and also about our relationship with nature,
which is the underpinning, the foundation
for any economy or any business.
I decided to stay small and realized that
I could grow in other ways beside material ways.
That I could grow by raising my consciousness,
by increasing education, knowledge for myself,
and for my customers, and for my staff.
I could grow by deepening the relationships
that I had by increasing my well-being and happiness
and that of my community, and by having more fun.
Rather than growing wide, I grew deep
in my own community and started putting on
educational programs; we became really
a hub for social activism.
We did programs taking our customers
on solar house tours, or teaching them
how to do energy audits of their house,
how bio-diesel fuel was made,
and how our farmer came and picked up our waste fry-oil
and took it out to his farm and
used it to heat his greenhouses
to extend the growing season, and all these things,
to educate.
And I really feel that in this day and age
that every business should become an educator,
and that became a product of the White Dog,
beside food and service, was education.
Sometimes people accused me of using good food
to lure innocent customers into social activism.
That's a good way to do it.
So we really grew a lot of programs.
There were two occasions,
two events that happened in the late fall,
early winter in 1999.
The first was the protests in Seattle
against the WTO, World Trade Organization,
where you saw so many people come out to protest
the role of corporations in our life
and the control that the corporations had
over the global economy.
It was really mischaracterized by the press
as being anti-global, but it was really
anti-corporate control of globalization.
I didn't know anything about the WTO,
I didn't know that Seattle protests were happening,
but my daughter was in college at the time,
and she went and she reported back to me,
and that's how I learned about it.
When I looked at the news, there was the farmers
and the environmentalists and the union leaders
and the professors and the students, all there
protesting against corporate control of our global economy.
But there was no voice of progressive business,
there was no alternative
vision being voiced.
So I saw the need for that,
especially to get young people working
on something positive rather than just
protesting what they didn't want.
Literally days after Seattle, Ben & Jerry's announced
that they were being sold to
the Dutch conglomerate Unilever,
and this was a real wake-up call to me.
It was a forced buy-out: Jerry and Ben did not want it.
But nevertheless, the sale did happen.
Ben & Jerry's had been the leader
in our industry's responsible business movement.
Absolutely.
I had learned from them about the living wage.
I had learned from them about the multiple bottom line,
that we measure our success not just by profit,
but our effect on society and the environment.
So, I literally sat up in bed in the middle of the night
and said, "My god, they've got Ben & Jerry's."
Because I realized--
That was a big deal.
It was a big deal to me,
because of my admiration for the company.
And it was indicative
of a turning point that then would occur
throughout the retail world of what we would
consider to have been consciously produced product.
There was a domino effect that started occurring from that.
Even before Ben & Jerry's, though,
Odwalla was sold to Coca-Cola,
Cascadian Farms to General Mills,
Rhino Records to Time Warner.
Seeds of Change to Mars.
Yeah, there you go.
And then more recently, Stonyfield Yogurt
to group Danone, the makers of Dannon yogurt.
The Body Shop to L'Oreal,
Tom's of Maine to Colgate,
Honest Tea to Coca-Cola.
So I could see that the socially responsible business
community and the models of our movement
were increasing the concentration of wealth and power,
the very thing that we had
organized against in the first place.
And of course, these national brands
often wipe out the smaller companies
as they grow bigger and bigger,
and even if they have good values within their company,
they're eliminating the small guys
until it's just this increasing power and control
by the large corporations.
This begins looking pretty much
like the corporations that purchased them to begin with.
Exactly, so I realized that
our movement for responsible business
was using the old paradigm to measure success,
which was continual growth.
Bottom line, yeah.
We were the same as what we opposed.
We had to look at growth in a new way,
'cause we had been neglecting the issue of scale,
what is the appropriate scale, what is a human scale
where relationships flourish and people are happiest
in the workplace, and where you can grow in different ways.
We were neglecting the issue of place, a sense of place,
that national brands aren't rooted in community,
they're not rooted in a particular natural environment
and local community.
And the third issue we were neglecting
was ownership, that we need to have many owners,
and the more owners we have, the more freedom we have.
That's what led me to start
a new national organization
BALLE, the Business Alliance for Local Living Economies,
which at the time I was the chair of the board
of Social Venture Network and along with colleagues there,
we started BALLE as a project of Social Venture Network,
and then eventually spun it off.
Laury Hammel was the co-founder with me.
He had a lot of experience in organizations,
so between the two of us, we launched BALLE
with the help of others, like David Korten
whose still on our board, Michael Shuman,
author of Going Local and The Small Mart Revolution,
who now works for BALLE
on projects he's an expert in,
and others on our board.
And so we started off in the fall of '01,
and we now have 75 networks.
We're an alliance of local networks,
so we're very decentralized, and what we do
is to help these local networks, there's 75 now
in the United States and Canada,
we help them get started,
we help them strengthen themselves
and connect to the other networks throughout the country.
That's where I've been really putting my efforts
for the last eight years in this movement.
In local living economies, we call them local
because basic needs are made locally
by locally owned farms and businesses,
and we say living because it's an economy
that supports both healthy, natural life
and vibrant community life.
Local living economies.
Do you want me to go into any detail about
BALLE or--
What I'd like to do is,
I would like to have everybody go to your website
and then, begin exploring this.
This is a handshake and an introduction
to what you've done, which is absolutely wonderful.
With what you're seeing right now,
you've already articulated a lot of the ways
in which we can begin.
We can begin by non-cooperation, non-participation,
and then we can start building
via some of the structures perhaps
you and your colleagues have already developed.
We can begin developing something new,
but there is a--
we do have to have a certain amount of courage,
and there's a certain risk that people
have to be willing to take in order to
recreate a system that has become severely dysfunctional.
Would you care to comment on that,
and the values that you do gain
from such an experience, before we wrap it up?
I think one of the things
I like most about the work I'm doing,
is that it's fun.
That when you work with your community
and you develop relationships,
that you know who bakes your bread,
and you know who brews your beer,
and you know who's building your house, or whatever,
that there's a collective joy.
Especially if you have a shared vision for your community.
As we do on the national level,
that we have a shared vision
for what we're trying to do nationally.
BALLE meets once a year, we have an annual conference.
Our eighth annual will be in
Charleston, South Carolina in 2010, May 21-23.
If folks want to find out more about us,
our website is livingeconomies.org.
Those who should come to our conference
include business owners to find out
what is the latest in terms of models
of local living economy enterprises,
what are the businesses we need to build a local economy,
the food processors, the textile producers,
the energy efficient folks, the renewable energy,
the alternative transportation:
all these different types of businesses.
And this is, by the way, how we feel
that BALLE is reinventing growth,
that BALLE entrepreneurs are reinventing growth,
because not only do we grow in non-material ways
that I described earlier, but we also grow
by looking to see what does our community need.
So, rather than starting a new business
that's a cookie-cutter chain in someone else's community,
we look to see, well, what does my community need?
And a perfect example of this is
the Zingerman family of businesses in Ann Arbor.
It started with Zingerman Deli
and was a very successful, highly successful deli
that could have easily done
a chain of Zingerman Delis; they're famous.
But instead of doing a chain of Zingerman Delis,
they said, "Our community doesn't have a bakery."
So they started a bakery.
They started a fair-trade, organic coffee roasting company.
They started a creamery, to make cheese and ice cream.
And they have a management consulting company,
they have a full-service restaurant.
And now, they've started their own farm
to grow the tomatoes for the sandwiches
and to freeze-dry them, or sun-dry them, the tomatoes
for the wintertime and so on.
So they've just begun!
But it's a different way of growing
that really serves your local community
and makes your local economy self-reliant.
And that's a really basic thing that we're trying to do,
whether it's helping the Zapatistas become self-reliant,
or really getting others out of their way,
because they've been self-reliant
for thousands of years, indigenous people have.
But we want to bring that back
to communities everywhere.
We feel that, if every community in the world
had food security, water security, and energy security
that that would create the foundation for world peace.
You bet.
Communities that are self-sustainable, as you say,
are not likely to engage in violent processes of any kind.
Right, exactly.
So this is a great start.
You're an incredible inspiration to people.
One person really can make
a massive difference in the world,
and I thank you so much for taking
a little bit of time to speak to us today.
You're welcome.
Judy's life is about encouraging others
to become involved in their own way
in their own communities.
To learn more about what she's up to,
you can go to her website at livingeconomies.org,
where she offers resources
to some 20,000 socially conscious entrepreneurs.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(slow horn music)